training to failure is the absolute best
way to achieve the best results in the
gym if you know how to do it right today
I'm going to teach you how to do it
right to understand how to train to
failure something that I will tell you
is you shouldn't actually do this all
the time taking complex movements close
to failure can increase the risk of
technical breakdown increasing the risk
of technical breakdown under heavy loads
is where we increase the risk of injury
we don't want to do that so how do we do
this periodize our effort or in other
words we don't do it every single week
we like to start conservative so that we
can have room to be able to progress
from week to week now to explain this
first I need to explain a few simple
Concepts let's start with RP that stands
for rating of perceived exertion which
is the scoring system out of 10 where a
10 RP is working to Absolute failure you
are pushing yourself to your absolute
limit 9 RP is working very very hard but
maybe you have about one repetition in
reserve 8 RP maybe about two repetitions
in reserve and so on now the next
concept is r i repetitions in reserve
which is a very great way of explaining
what 9 RP is one rep in reserve 8 RP two
reps in reserve you get the point now
I'm going to give you a 4-we model that
you can use straight away week one start
conservative how conservative well I
like to score this about a 7 RP it's
pretty hard to know exactly what 7 RP is
but you've got to go conservative enough
to make sure that there are reps in the
tank and aren't going to fail if you go
too light that's totally fine it just
means that you get to take a bigger jump
next week if you go too heavy this is
where we run into problems going to fail
on week one means it's going to be
pretty hard to progress on week two and
doing the same way week after week just
isn't fun and it is not the best way to
get the most out of our training so
starting conservative or 7 RP does a few
things it ensures that you're going to
get all reps and all sets throughout the
entire program and it also ensures that
you're going to be able to do that with
excellent lifting technique now week
number two we go up in weight I like to
say rp8 but that doesn't matter so much
as long as you've gone up in weight in
that logical incremental increase I like
to say anywhere between 2 to 5% increase
the easier week one was the bigger that
increase will be now week two you're
still leaving reps in reserve so you
shouldn't really go to fail especially
considering Week 1 was quite
conservative which gave you a whole week
of practicing with excellent technique
and you're going to come into week two
even stronger week three is where it
should start getting hard we've
increased with the exact same
incremental increase as week 1:2 which
means that we should be getting closer
to about 9 RP 9 RP is very hard to
predict so sometimes we could be getting
to a point where we're taking our sets
to fail on week three but that's totally
fine because now you've earned it week
one and week 2 was excellent practice at
the demands of the entire program week
two was a little bit harder week three
is the hardest week of this 4-we block
and we're taking these movements as
close to fail as possible while still
completing the entire session now week
four is de lo or reassess week the
reason why I say reassess is because not
everyone deserves a D Lo the simple rule
is you need to load before you Deo now
what de loading is is reducing the
amount of fatigue that we've accumulated
through our program the biggest reason
why we're fatigued is because we've
accumulated so much volume so the best
thing to deload is the amount of volume
that we perform so therefore if we need
to deload my favorite start point is
reducing the total sets by half and
maintaining that same logical
incremental increase that we followed
from Week 1 to two to three and now to
week four how do you know if you need
the de lo well you should be performing
the first set or two and if you feel
like you've got the energy to perform
the entire session go for it if if it's
getting a bit fatiguing have the sets
your session is done that was fun we've
gone super heavy we've gone super close
to fail if not too fail and now we've
reduced the volume by half so therefore
we've recovered some of our energy
levels therefore we've created a
substantial recovery ready to start our
next phase and repeat that process now
if you feel that week four wasn't a
sufficient D Lo remember what week one
of the next phase is that is
conservative loads so week four we've
hared the volume and then week one of
the next phase we've reduced the
intensity so this is how we can
guarantee that we're coming into all of
our training sessions with the right
amount of energy levels and progress
from phase to phase all year round so to
wrap this up it's also important to
understand that individual differences
play a huge role in the way that each
person responds to our style of
programming some people find things more
fatiguing than others and this is a
great system that you can follow
immediately to understand how your body
responds to certain amounts of volume
and intensity so if you find hitting a
PB and working to Absolute fail and not
getting the best out of your training
fun that's fine but if your goal is to
plant the seed to set yourself up to
continual progression week after week
month after month subscribe for more